Basilisk
Monstrosity
 armor creature turn foot basilisk basilisk creature saving throw basilisk save creature stone saving throw end turn success effect failure creature restoration spell magic creature eye saving throw start turn basilisk start turn eye basilisk meantime save basilisk reflection foot light rival gaze bite ft . target 2d6 damage poison damage basilisk horror gaze victim stone jaw creature stone form gullet armor creature turn foot basilisk basilisk creature saving throw basilisk save creature stone saving throw end turn success effect failure creature restoration spell magic creature eye saving throw start turn basilisk start turn eye basilisk meantime save basilisk reflection foot light rival gaze bite ft . target 2d6 damage poison damage basilisk horror gaze victim stone jaw creature stone form gullet
 start see force make incapacitate begin turn restrain repeat end petrify free avert avoid do see avert look make see mistake target hit reach hit pierce transform consume return start see force make incapacitate begin turn restrain repeat end petrify free avert avoid do see avert look make see mistake target hit reach hit pierce transform consume return
 unaligned natural other failed next great other surprised next bright multilegged reptilian deadly porous strong organic unaligned natural other failed next great other surprised next bright multilegged reptilian deadly porous strong organic
Medium Monstrosity, Unaligned natural armor Petrifying Gaze. If a creature starts its turn within 30 feet of the basilisk and the two of them can see each other, the basilisk can force the creature to make a DC 12 Constitution saving throw if the basilisk isn't incapacitated. On a failed save, the creature magically begins to turn to stone and is restrained. It must repeat the saving throw at the end of its next turn. On a success, the effect ends. On a failure, the creature is petrified until freed by the greater restoration spell or other magic. A creature that isn't surprised can avert its eyes to avoid the saving throw at the start of its turn. If it does so, it can't see the basilisk until the start of its next turn, when it can avert its eyes again. If it looks at the basilisk in the meantime, it must immediately make the save. If the basilisk sees its reflection within 30 feet of it in bright light, it mistakes itself for a rival and targets itself with its gaze. Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage. A basilisk is a multilegged, reptilian horror whose deadly gaze transforms victims into porous stone. With its strong jaws, the creature consumes this stone, which returns to organic form in its gullet.


